---
layout: post
title: Backing up a Dying Phone - Good Beats Unfinished Perfect Every Time
categories: Portfolio
---
When you work in tech, one of the most dangerous things to happen to your workflow is the siren song of the perfect implementation. It’s easy to spend so much time researching the best way to do something that you forget to actually do it, especially when there’s no looming deadline to force your hand. The danger is that a problem will arise and you’ll need your implementation already in place and then you’re really in trouble.

That’s what happened to me when my phone started dying – the LCD began to leak, becoming a slowly expanding black hole that would make my phone unusable within 24 hours. Had I been diligent, I would’ve already had a backup solution in place and most of my data already safe, so all I would’ve needed to do was run a final sync, give my phone a proper funeral, and start shopping for a replacement. Unfortunately, I had been so focused on which solution was the perfect fit for my needs, balancing price, transparency, ease of access, etc, that I hadn’t gotten around to implementing it, and that meant that I had to move very quickly before I lost everything on my phone. In doing so, I learned more than just the importance of not letting the perfect get in the way of the good. I also learned a few important lessons about what to do when a crisis hits you’re not remotely equipped for.

First, the obvious: Settle for “good enough.” If you got into this mess by obsessing over the perfect way to do something, your first step is to stop digging that hole and take a practical step forward. It doesn’t matter if it’s perfect, all that matters is you’re moving in the right direction. In my case, that was realizing that I couldn’t trust myself to set up a proper backup service on my dying phone – I would need to back it up manually. It’s undoubtedly worse than syncthing or the like, but I knew I could pull data much more simply than I could set up a new service.

Second: Scramble, but don’t panic. When time is tight, your mindset becomes critical. You can’t afford to waste time second-guessing past actions or future ones, but you also can’t afford to waste time stressing about the consequences of failure. In my situation, once I had decided how to move forward, that meant no regrets or overthinking – I had my heading and I wasn’t deviating.

Third: Triage, triage, triage. This is important in any crisis, but in one with a looming deadline it became critical. When trying to save the data on my phone, I divided everything up into four categories of data: 
The first category was all the data that would be easily bulk transferred off of the phone – all I would have to do is connect everything together, set the phone to data transfer, and copy everything onto my computer. This category included most of what I actually cared about – every photo I took, every file I downloaded, things like that. 
The second category consisted of all the data locked up in apps that I wasn’t in a position to try and find in my phone’s file structure. This is stuff like my saved locations in my GPS app, saved videos in my youtube client, steps in my pedometer app, bookmarks in my browser, that sort of thing. Most of this data would be already in the cloud were I using mainstream apps, but I tend to like more private, local apps, so I had to do it manually. Fortunately, these apps all had export features built-in, and by exporting them to new folder on my device, I could back up those files in the same way I grabbed everything in the first category.
The third category is more of a subset of category two – the rare application data that can’t be easily exported. For me, that was messenger data. Some messengers have easy ways to export data, but some of my messages were plain old SMS in a plain old app with no export options. My best bet was to grab an old, halfway-obsolete SMS backup app and hope for the best. Deciding on the right one would’ve taken me hours or even days under normal circumstances, but since I had already corrected my mindset, I picked the first one I saw that was compatible with my device and ran it. And sure enough, it worked fine. Maybe something else would’ve worked better, but I didn’t have time to search.
And finally, the fourth category was data I just had to accept would be lost. This is stuff like configuration data, the way my home screen looked, wifi passwords, bluetooth pairings, that sort of thing. It was unfortunate, but I didn’t have an easy way to back that data up and didn’t have time to search. I simply had to accept that it was going to go down with the ship.

Fourth: Use downtime productively. I very often had situations where a system was running, or installing, or copying, and all I could do was hurry up and wait. Here too it’s important to keep the proper mindset – if you can predict a step will take time, build your overall strategy around that, even if that means starting that process before you have the rest of your strategy fully formed. In my case, I knew I was going to need a bulk backup, and I knew backing up a secondhand phone onto an old laptop wasn’t going to be fast, so I got that started immediately. It would’ve been more efficient to export my data from the apps in category 2 before I copied everything, since those exports ended up in my phone’s storage anyway, but I wasn’t sure how I was going to handle application data at first, and spending time thinking about it as my phone is dying and I’m not trying to move any data would’ve been an even worse idea. Better to get it moving, then think and plan in the downtime.

By keeping focused, resisting the urge to optimize, prioritizing what mattered, and refusing to slow down, I was eventually able to get everything I cared about backed up. Some of it was cutting it close, like turning the phone 180 degrees to flip the screen because the bottom of the screen was slightly more legible than the top kind of close, but I managed to get it done in the nick of time. I learned a lot doing that, and while I would definitely recommend just using a backup service rather than gambling on being able to do this, the upside is that whenever I pull out my new phone I get a fresh reminder about the importance of allowing the good to override the pipe dream of the perfect, and to resist that siren song of the perfect implementation.