---
layout: post
title: The Risk of Mass Appeal - a Study in UGreen
categories: Portfolio
---

Something I noticed recently is this push toward taking the NAS, traditionally something found only in production environments or the homelabs of serious tech enthusiasts, and marketing it toward everyday end users. The idea is that as costs rise everywhere, people get tired of paying for subscriptions like cloud storage and game servers and Netflix, and something like a NAS will pay for itself after a few years. It’s marketed as freeing yourself from corporate shackles and the like. And there’s nothing wrong with that, I think it’s pretty cool that more people know about this stuff. But there are some pitfalls in this expansion that not every company is prepared for.  
  
First, a little background. There are two main consumer NAS manufacturers right now, Synology and UGreen. Synology has been around forever, they have lots of great documentation, and their stuff works well. However, they damaged a lot of their credibility a few years ago when they briefly limited their machines to only use their own branded hard drives. While they backtracked on that, it hasn’t stopped people from vowing never to use them again. Their main competitor, UGreen, is much newer, having only jumped into the NAS market a few years ago. They tend to be more affordable, with very similar levels of quality, and I would bet that within a few years they’ll be the clear favorite in the market if they don’t do something stupid. Basically, if you’re jumping into owning a NAS and you want a custom-designed system, your choices are the Synology, the Old Reliable, or UGreen, the New Hotness.

I was recently asked to assist a user who had chosen the New Hotness. He had set everything up, got the drives working, but he  was having problems setting up automated backups. When I started diving into the way UGreen’s software works, I ran into a serious problem: it’s surprisingly barebones the moment you scratch the glossy surface. You want to run Tailscale? The docker compose file they provide has multiple mistakes. You want to set up rsync? The UI doesn't warn you that your username can’t have spaces in it, so a user who's used to an OS without that restriction can easily lock himself out of the feature. You want to look through the documentation? Good luck digging through a sinkhole of AI-generated video tutorials, sluggish support, and third-party forums where nobody is sure how to help. I eventually got everything working, although the Tailscale issue in particular took days of trial and error, but I left the ordeal wondering why UGreen is so well-liked. And after giving it some thought, I think I know why.

See, a lot of the issues my user was running into were things an experienced NAS user would never have struggled with. They would know not to use spaces in a username, they would have their own docker compose for Tailscale that had worked on machines before, and they would have access to much more focused forums than I could find. More than that, they probably wouldn’t have issues with the built-in UGreen software because most of them do what I did with my own NAS and just run a lightweight linux distro through CLI and SSH. When I asked around about navigating some of the software, I'd hear things like “I don’t know how to do this in the system, here’s how to do it in the command line,” at which point I had to sigh because I was trying to make instructions so the end user could maintain it himself, not sign on as his personal sysadmin.

This is what UGreen didn’t think through. When all you're doing is poaching Synology users and marketing yourself to enthusiasts, you don’t need much in the way of quality software or extensive documentation, because anyone who’s even heard of you already knows enough to be competent. I’ve used plenty of software like that, where its obscurity protects it from fresh faces who need everything explained to them. But then UGreen decided to appeal to the wider market, and their ads started attracting absolute beginners who need strong support, and their documentation isn’t even close to enough for them.

So UGreen has a choice to make. They can go back to just aiming squarely at their enthusiast base, keep their very limited documentation, and make a lot less money. Alternatively, they can aim high, make something for everyone and market it to the masses, but they absolutely have to upgrade their support and documentation. Explain the basics to the new players, or they’re just going to leave.